#Week 2 day 1 SQL intro

SQL Intro

Language that communicates with databases
Structured query language
If you want to pull/edit/add data information to a database you can use the language of SQL do to that
Easy scenario to visualise:
Database = Warehouse
Data tables = Storage cabinets
Data = Files
Database is made using coding language e.g. C+ / Java
How to access the data? 1) Build a "storefront app", 2) Hire a delivery/translator (SQL)
If you learn to speak SQL you can get her to retrieve files for you
3 things to remember about SQL:

Knowing how to get data means you can use data in your job
There's variations (syntaxes) to SQL
SQL is a language that only speaks to Relational Databases
What was done so far today:

Server set up
SELECT * FROM Employees for table to be displayed Select the line and press run OR alternatively fn + f5

SP_HELP Employees For details about the structure of the table to be displayed

Objectives for today

Understand database terminology
Build SQL database
Insert some common data types into database
List various database tools in common use
Compare and explain different database structures
Explain simple database relational structure
What is a database?

Organised collection of data (repository)
To efficiently retrieve data
Excel is not for historically storing data- it is not organised or efficient
identities are formed using tables - relational (RDBMS) database e.g. in internet everything imputed is stored somewhere

need to store table in organised manner in order to be able to query the information & retrieve it
need to make sure data is labelled correctly!
generally try to retrieve rows for full
USE master to directly connect to other databases in query

Terminology

Column : Tables are composed of columns corresponding to attributes of object

Row : One set of attributes corresponding to one instance that a table describes. Also known as Records or Tuples.

Table : predefined format of rows and columns that define an entity. Also known as file

DBMS : A DataBase Management System allows computer to perform database functions of storing, retrieving, adding, deleting & modifying data.

anything which we want to model (table) is an entity

_Relational Databases contain connected data! the tables should be related_

Primary vs Foreign Key

Primary key will uniquely identify data which can be retrieved from a data. Has to be unique and have no duplicate values. Can be different forms of data types. SHOULDN'T CHANGE
Foreign key can have duplicate values or have null values. It is used to link two tables together. Foreign Key is a field (or collection of fields) in one table that refers to the PRIMARY KEY in another table.
Types of Databases

Flat-file = Stores everything in one table. Good for small numbers of records for single topic
Relational = Gives you ability to separate masses of data into numerous tables. Linked to each other through the use of keys
Big Data = MongoDB, Vertigo etc. Used for Data Analytics and Business Intelligence. Digital age and Internet of Things
Relational Databases

Entity relationship diagrams = shows the relationship between 2 entities
Relationship Types

One to One

When one record from one table will point to only one record in a second table
Each row in table A is linked with only 1 in table B
e.g. Contact info table
One to Many

Each row in table is related to many rows in relating table
This allows frequently used info to be saved only once in a table and referenced many times in all other tables
For an example: An amazon order can refer to a variety of different items
Many to Many

One or more rows in a table to be related to 0, 1 or many rows in another table
Third table called mapping or link is required in order to implement such relationship.
For an example: courses may have multiple students and a student may be enrolled in multiple courses
A _JUNCTION TABLE_ will need to be created in order to create 1-1 relationship between Table A and Table B
_COMPOSITE PRIMARY KEY_ = 2 columns from different tables added together to create a unique primary key. Should consider the least number of columns to create a composite primary key
When one or more columns combine together and can identify every thing on the table to create a separate key value
Candidate Keys = When you can choose multiple options for primary key. The designer will choose one.
Primary Key

Uniquely identifies each record in the table
Most tables should have one
Each table can have more than one column which is part of Primary Key (composite key) e.g. Order No + Order Line No
It can either be an attribute that is garuanteed to be unique e.g. National insurance number or number generated by the DBMS
The DBMS will enforce uniqueness of the Primary Key- not allowing repeated records
Two types of Primary Key

Simple
Compound / Composite Key
Primary Key Constraints

Must be unique
Must always have an entry (cannot be blank or Null)
The value must never change
Each table may have a maximum of one Primary Key
Foreign Key

Used to create solid relationships
Ensure that row of information in Table A corresponds to the correct row of Table B
The constraint is used to prevent actions that would destroy links between tables
It prevents valid data from being inserted into the foreign key column, because it has to be one of the values contained in the table it points to
There is no Uniqueness Constraint for Foreign Keys
A table can have any number of Foreign Keys
A row cannot be deleted from a reference table if it's in use via a foreign key
